---
layout: post
title: "My thoughts on AI code generators"
date: 2023-08-02
tags: ["programming"]
categories: programming
description: "
A lot of AI tools are popping up and use is becoming widespread. There is no
doubt that AI generated code is not perfect, but what about the legality of
using it?
"
published: true
---

> **Disclaimer:** I am not a lawyer. Please consult with a lawyer if you have
> any doubts regarding licensing and copyright.

With the advent of AI code generators, the question of copyright and ownership
has arisen. AI generates new code based on what it was trained on, but there
have been cases of it outputting exact matches of code available online. This
poses a problem. How will a human user ever know whether the output is legally
allowed to be used? It has been shown that ChatGPT (not sure which version) was
able to output code licensed under GPL, which could be devastating if included
in a proprietary codebase. The responsibility should lie on the AI developers
to only use data that will not cause any legal issues. If they are offering a
service that could **potentially** output copyrighted/licensed code it should
have a clear disclaimer and could never be used for business or open-source
purposes. However, it is still fine for personal use.

Permissively licensed code can technically be used freely, but there is still
the issue of preserving the copyright and license for that code. An AI will
likely lose that information when it "generates" the code. The code available
for training a "business-grade AI" would have to be anything in the public
domain (for those who want to license code to the public domain there is the
[CC0](https://spdx.org/licenses/CC0-1.0.html) license).

Even when the code is generated by the AI (i.e. not a direct copy of code found
elsewhere), who can claim copyright? David Gewirtz [did some digging into
this](https://www.zdnet.com/article/who-owns-the-code-if-chatgpts-ai-helps-write-your-app-does-it-still-belong-to-you/)
and the copyright likely falls into the public domain for the same reason that
any work produced by nature, animals, or plants does. An AI is not a legal entity
and can therefore not hold any copyright. Though there have yet to be any big
lawsuits around AI-generated code.

There was one case regarding a graphic novel created with the help of the AI
Midjourney. The conclusion from The U.S. Copyright Office was that, while the
work itself was copyrightable because it required human work to add text and
put it all together, the images generated by Midjourney were not subject to
copyright.

How the licensing issues play out we will probably see in the coming years. I'm
very wary of using any AI-generated code and will likely avoid it in the
foreseeable future.
