---
layout: post
title: "Introduction to Time Sensitive Networking"
date: 2022-05-13
tags: networks
description: "Where did it come from? What is it? What's the future of it?"
published: false
---

Disclaimer: I am in no way an expert at this. I'm learning it as part of a
research project at work. This will be the first post in what I hope to be a
series

## What is it?
Time Sensitive Networking (TSN) is a topic in the networking world where there
exists packets that absolutely must arrive within a limited time. It is a fairly
new topic and some of the techniques are not completely industry-tested yet. It
originates from the sound and video world where they have sound and video that
must arrive very quickly. It was originally called Audio Video Bridging (AVB),
but was renamed to Time Sensitive Networking (TSN) in 2012.

It could be used at concerts, for example. The sound data must to travel from
the microphones to all the speakers, and maybe some cameras to stream to the
screen; and it all has to happen very quickly. Humans are very sensitive to
delays in sound and video when it doesn't match up with the reality. To make
this even more complex there is often other types of data traveling the network
as well. You could make the argument that the sound should use its own cables;
however, that is extra maintenance and requires a separate network to run on. It
is convenient to be able to use the same network for everything.


To work around this they have come up with several techniques for handling
Quality of Service (QoS) in networks. I will cover some QoS techniques now, and
further posts will go more in-depth on some of them. These are all defined in
IEEE standards.

### Strict Priority (802.1Q)

### Time-Aware Shaper (802.1Qbv)

### Credit-Based Shaper (802.1Qav)

### Frame Preemption (802.1Qbu)

### Frame Replication and Elimination for Reliability (802.1CB)



## TSN today
Today it is used in the automobile industry and factories as part of Industry
4.0 to guarantee that important control data reaches its destination in time.
And soon it might also be used in trains as part of the Shift2Rail project
sponsored by EU.


