---
layout: post
title: "Introduction to Time Sensitive Networking"
date: 2022-05-13
tags: networks
description: "Where did it come from? What is it? What's the future of it?"
published: false
---

Disclaimer: I am in no way an expert at this. I'm learning it as part of a
research project at work. This will be the first post in what I hope to be a
series of posts on TSN.

## What is it?
Time Sensitive Networking (TSN) is a topic in the networking world where there
exists packets that absolutely must arrive within a limited time. It is a fairly
new topic and some of the techniques are not completely industry-tested yet. It
originates from the sound and video world where they have sound and video that
must arrive very quickly. It was originally called Audio Video Bridging (AVB),
but was renamed to Time Sensitive Networking (TSN) in 2012.

It could be used at concerts, for example. The sound data must to travel from
the microphones to all the speakers, and maybe some cameras to stream to the
screen; and it all has to happen very quickly. Humans are very sensitive to
delays in sound and video when it doesn't match up with the reality. To make
this even more complex there is often other types of data traveling the network
as well. You could make the argument that the sound should use its own cables;
however, that is extra maintenance and requires a separate network to run on. It
is convenient to be able to use the same network for everything.


To work around this they have come up with several techniques for handling
Quality of Service (QoS) in networks. I will cover some QoS techniques now, and
future posts will go more in-depth on some of them. These are all defined in
IEEE standards.

### Strict Priority (802.1Q)
The most basic form of QoS. This, as well as several of the below techniques, are
based on the concept of multiple egress queues. Usually 8 of them. With 8 queues
you can do a 1-to-1 mapping from the Priority Code Point (PCP) in the VLAN tag.
There are some techniques to set the priority from software (see `man mqprio`).
In Linux, this is the `skb->priority` field. But when you use QoS you usually
want the packets to only pass through the hardware. There is currently only
support in the Linux kernel to set this for this for the DSCP field (`man
dcb-app`), but hopefully we can get a proper way to set this for PCP as well. It
is already supported by a lot of the hardware. There are other ways to do this
in the hardware as well, but not all are ideal.

As for the algorithm itself, it is very simple. It transmits packets in order
of priority. When it starts transmitting a packet it picks from the highest
priority queue that is not empty. A lower priority queue will only transmit if
all higher priority queues are empty. Below is an illustration of 3 transmit
queues with packets A-H, where packets in queue 2 would have the highest
priority.

```
Queue
    ----------------------
  0 ->     [H] [G] [F] [D] ->
    ----------------------
  1 ->             [E] [C] ->
    ----------------------
  2 ->             [B] [A] ->
    ----------------------

```

### Time-Aware Shaper (802.1Qbv)
This extends the Strict Priority algorithm by adding a time aspect to it and
splitting the time into several slots where different priorities are allowed to
send in each slot. For example, it could have 2 slots, one where only priority 7
(highest) is allowed to send, and another where priority 0-6 are allowed to
send. The time slots can be of different length. For the second slot there are 7
different priorities that can send, so between those it applies Strict Priority.

Time-Aware Shapers can run in software, but the benefit it gives is completely
lost. To be at all useful it needs to be offloaded to hardware, which also
requires a PTP hardware clock. On top of the clock itself it should also be time
synced to all other switches in the network. Otherwise, there is also very
little point in using it. If all switches are synced it will result in the same
priorities all being open at once in the network; ideally letting the packets
flow all the way to their destination without being interrupted by other
traffic. To put it simply, it can reserve bandwidth for the different
priorities and giving the network a deterministic behavior (at least for high
priorities), but of course this assumes you aren't overloading the network
itself. If you try to overload the link it will obviously drop and delay packets.



### Credit-Based Shaper (802.1Qav)
The original TSN technique that was invented for the purpose of audio and video.
It reduces the congestion in the network by evening out bursts. It is a form of
fair queueing. Like Strict Priority, this also uses multiple egress queues. Each
queue holds a credit score that goes up when a queue is not transmitting, and
down when it transmits. When the credit score goes negative it is not allowed to
transmit. By evening out the traffic to get rid of bursts the data can flow more
freely in the network. This is especially useful when there are many devices in
the network that may send bursts. If all send a burst at once it can result in
the queues filling up where the bursts meet.

### Frame Preemption (802.1Qbu)
Frame preemption is the only of the priority-based TSN techniques that
**requires** both ends of a link to support its protocol. The ones above can all
operate on a single switch, though ideally used in a network were all are
running the same technique. It also requires hardware support. With frame
preemption both sides work together to provide faster delivery speed. To begin,
we first have to define which priorities (queues) are to be considered
preemptible. This is done independently on each switch. 

If a preemptible frame is currently being transmitted and an express
(non-preemptible) frame arrives to the queue it will almost immediately stop the
preemptible frame (it preempts it). To not have wasted all the work already
done sending the frame it appends a CRC32 checksum to the end of the partial
frame, as well as inverts the last 16 bits of the CRC value to distinguish a
partial frame from a regular frame. When that is done it can start sending the
express frame. The partial frame is stored in a separate buffer on the other
end and waits for the other half of its frame to arrive. The other half is sent
when no more express traffic is available to send.

### Frame Replication and Elimination for Reliability (802.1CB)



## TSN today
Today it is used in the automobile industry and factories as part of Industry
4.0 to guarantee that important control data reaches its destination in time.
And soon it might also be used in trains as part of the Shift2Rail project
sponsored by EU.


